the United States has underlined its
support for Israel while making it clear
it does not want to see any more
escalation in the region here's what
National Security Council spokesperson
John Kirby told the US broadcaster
NBC what Israel demonstrated last night
was an incredible ability to defend
itself just their own military
superiority was quite uh remarkable
yesterday uh I mean very little got
through and the damage was
extraordinarily light and also I Israel
demonstrated again as I said that
they're not standing alone that they
have friends uh so the president's been
clear we don't want to see this escalate
we don't we're not looking for a wider
war with Iran um I think uh I think you
know the coming hours and days will will
tell us a lot tww reporter in Washington
Stephan Simons has this assessment the
US has no interest for Israel to take
any action which could possibly escalate
the situation from where we are right
now or where the us or where is Israel
and Iran are right now um the US is
assessing or the white house
administration um is assessing the
situation as actually quite dire that if
Israel is pushing this further this
could really result in a regional
conflict nobody wants the Biden
Administration doesn't want however of
course we all quoted this many times the
Ironclad support for Israel that is
there the administration is adamant
about repeating in this that there is
absolute um support for Israel in any
defense defensive manner if you will um
that means if Israel is attacked Again
by Iran or anybody else the US will
stand by Israel helping to defend them
however no such support supp uh promised
by the us if the Israel if the war
cabinet if Benjamin Nano should decide
to go on the offensive here and
retaliate in a way or at all perhaps uh
towards Iran which would escalate the
whole situation so this is a little bit
the if you will thin line of of rope uh
the US is trying to balance in here uhuh
and the war in Gaza has already hurt
Biden politically hasn't
it of course it has um Biden's standing
with uh whatever happened in or what all
happened in in October at October 7th La
uh last year hasn't been improved moved
or getting better to the contrary he is
under a lot of pressure from Arab
Americans who want to see Biden
administration's efforts to increase and
to intensify when it comes to a
sustainable peace agreement or truth
agreement between Israel and and Hamas
in Gaza the release of the hostages and
more Aid humanitarian Aid into Gaza now
the Biden Administration has worked on
this there is a deal on the table for
Hamas to accept for the release of
hostages and four more eight and for a
six way six we truth but according to
reports Hamas has rejected that and that
means for the Biden Administration back
to square one a regional conflict would
really cause trouble for the Biden
Administration um we have a presidential
election year uh so any conflict outside
the US of that magnitude uh does not
look good on the president no matter
what he does or doesn't do and the
president's hosting a G7 meeting uh not
only has he said uh pledged his clad
support as you put it like he did only
days ago uh he also talked about wanting
to coordinate a United diplomatic
response what are the Diplomatic options
here well the Diplomatic options as you
know the US has no direct uh diplomatic
relations with uh Iran the Swiss handled
this for the United States however the
US still understands and sees itself as
the leader of the PC when it comes to
organize diplomatic respons economic
responses to any threat uh scenario Iran
or anybody else poses uh for the region
remember we're talking about the Middle
East so we're talking about Oil we're
talking about uh uh freedom of movement
of ships etc etc Iran could play a role
there so this G7 meeting uh which is
handled like a zoom meeting remotely uh
will probably discuss possible sanctions
or sanction scenarios um but it is
foremost about really uniting a front of
Partners and allies of the United States
in their diplomatic efforts to uh
impress on Israel not to escalate this
now with
a disappropriate response to what
happened and to impress on Iran to um
not do anything further uh I think that
is uh that is definitely of of the most
importance for the United States right
now leading this or asking for this G7
meeting and organizing this this
diplomatic response and pressure on all
parties involved
there back here in Europe German
Chancellor Olaf Schultz has responded to
the Iranian assault but he's on a trip
right now to China where he'll be
meeting with among others president XI
Jin ping here what he had to say a short
time
ago we strongly condemn the Iranian
attack and warn against any further
escalation Iran must not continue down
this path
at the same time it's absolutely clear
to us that we stand in solidarity with
Israel which has every right to defend
itself we will do everything we can to
prevent further escalation and will
therefore continue to pursue our current
course we can only warn everyone
especially Iran against continuing down
this path to look at the intern
implications of the Iranian attack on
Israel I'm joined by uh Richard Walker
our international chief editor tell us
more about Schultz and his meeting with
Xi Jinping on Tuesday he's hoping to get
help in avoiding further escalation but
they get that yeah so I mean it it it's
really quite fascinating to see Ola
Schultz of course on the other side of
the world at the moment I mean he's just
been in chonging we just saw the
pictures there from the the city in
China where a German company has a
hydrogen facility and he's been Touring
that and you might think well he's he's
got other things on his mind today than
looking at a hydrogen Factory but I
think that the Germans are saying that
the fact that they get to talk to XI Jin
ping the Chinese president on Tuesday
really makes this trip worth it even
from the point of view of the this this
new risk of escalation going on the
Germans were briefing before this trip
that they would be going and asking the
Chinese for help to try to keep a lid on
things and this of course is
particularly with respect to Iran where
China has a close relationship
and as a sign of that it's interesting
to see so Tony blinkin The American
Secretary of State spoke to Wang Yi his
Chinese counterpart um just a couple of
days ago um and the Chinese foreign
Ministry spokesperson said that China uh
condemns the attack on the Iranian
Embassy in Syria so so China very much
kind of taking Iran's side uh in what
the backdrop to to what's happened here
this this attack on the um Iranian facil
ility in Syria so indicating that the
Chinese feel kind of that the Iranians
were you know had every right to
retaliate now the question will be well
you know do do the Chinese really want
to risk a major escalation what could
that mean for them and if you look at
the Chinese economy it is very dependent
on oil imports from the Middle East so
any kind of major war that could cause
disruption perhaps to oil exports
through the Straits of Horus for example
that could be very disruptive to China
especially at a time that its economic
economy is weak so I think Schulz would
be appealing on those kind of
self-interested grounds as well as uh on
grounds of his own commitment to
Israel's defense and you're saying that
because it could cause some sort of
unrest back home in China well well well
China is struggling with its economy um
the kind of disruption that could happen
to oil markets um if there were a major
conflict that that shut down the
straights for moose that would affect
China as much as any it would affect any
other oil importing country at a time
when the Chinese economy is in trouble
so so I think these are some of the
undercurrents I think Schultz will
certainly be appealing on I think now
the German foreign minister analena Bok
said today that the Middle East was on
the edge of a precipice that Iran had
almost pushed the region into chaos
let's listen
in the Iranian regime has clearly led
the entire Middle East to the brink of
the
Abyss Iran fired over 300 Rockets drones
and cruise missiles at Israel last
night we condemn in the strongest
possible terms the direct Iranian attack
on the territory of Israel Germany's
full solidarity extends to
Israel a stark warning there from bear
Bach Richard yeah I mean I think
reflecting just this level of concern
which we've seen back to October 7th and
the Hamas terrorist attack on Israel
that that really set off the this this
new stage of instability in the Middle
East um that there's been this concern
that there could be a major escalation
and particularly a war between Israel
and Iran and this is the closest we've
been to that yet as we've been hearing
you know that this term unprecedented
you know it hasn't happened before that
Iran has directly attacked Israel nobody
really knows how that is going to change
the dynamic in the region yet so I think
we got clear concerns here in Berlin and
a flurry of international diplomatic
activity of course will this be able to
stop any potential escal yeah so we've
got the UN security council meeting uh
in the afternoon New York time today of
course the UN Security Council has not
shown itself able to really deal with
the major conflicts Ukraine Middle East
or others at the moment because it is so
kind of deadlocked uh amid the the
greater kind of great power competition
going on between the Western powers and
and Russia and China on the other hand
so there it's quite possible that that
will just descend into a kind of a Blame
Game the G7 will also be talking we've
heard about that already already I think
the Western Powers will want to be
sending messages of reassurance to
Israel that they have its back but at
the same time wanting to try to work on
Israel to to to try to persuade it not
to retaliate in a major way to what has
just happened so that's the delicate
balance the Western powers are going to
be trying to walk at the moment and
let's bring in farers jeder a professor
of Middle Eastern politics and
international relations at the London
School of Economics now of course we're
talking about limited damage but how
surprised were you by the scale of
Iran's attack on
Israel I was very surprised this was a
significant uh unprecedented attack by
Iran at the first time ever in history
uh 300 drones ballistic missiles uh
cruise missiles um and I think what Iran
uh was trying to do is to deliver the
message uh and the message was delivered
loud and clear it's all about uh
restoring the terror for Iran um Iran
did not really want to trigger all out
war with Israel or with the United
States and that's why it was
telegraphing to the world uh in the past
10 days that it's intent to retaliate uh
and the fact that the United States
moved major air defense capabilities to
the area and United Kingdom and France
it tells you a great deal that the
Strategic goal of Iran was not to really
do a lot of damage or kill Israelis but
rather to deliver the message that it's
willing to stand up and basically
retaliate for attacks by Israel against
its sovereignty um and in particular
against its Consulate in Syria okay well
if this is all about deterrence and the
message was heard loud and clear what
sort of response do you expect then or
reaction from
Israel first of all I I was actually I
disagree with your correspondent because
General Gan said and this is an usual
for Israelis he said we will respond at
a time of our choosing what he's really
is saying is that Iran used to say the
same thing in the past few years um it
tells me um I I don't know I could be
wrong that obviously President Biden has
impressed on Israeli Prime Minister the
need to
deescalate um and I think yesterday
Israel and the top leadership came to
realize that its security depends on its
superpow pattern in particular the
United States and Britain and France and
a regional Coalition I mean let's look
at what what Jordan did Jordan uh
basically played a major role in
destroying tens of drones uh over
Jordanian territories so my hope the
Iranians said today uh the matter is
concluded uh they have no plans to
escalate um I take it that if Israel
does not really respond in the next
couple of days I think the Middle East
uh basically uh would have been or could
have been saved from a major um
explosion I mean a allout regional War
I'm not suggesting the risk is not there
but the next couple of days are really
critical uh to see whether uh the region
itself will step back from the brink or
we'll see further escalation between um
Israel and uh Iran and their allies
local and international allies so far
was what sort of steps need to be taken
in those next days uh to ensure
deescalation well I think first of all I
think it all really depends on adults in
the room uh because I think what we are
seeing now is that there are very few
adults in the room uh in the past 6
months uh despite everything that the
Biden admin ation has provided for
Israel I think President Biden has
failed to exercise influence or leverage
over netanyahu's War cabinet it seems to
me what we might be seeing is a game
changer um in the sense or at least I
hope that not only the United States now
will exercise influence over Decisions
by Israel visis Iran but at least bring
about the end of the humanitarian
catastrophe in Gaza is far the release
of Israeli host hostages and the release
of is Palestinian prisoners uh this
really could basically begin uh I mean
the beginning of the end of the
catastrophic situation in Gaza and the
region as a whole okay positive note
there to finish on with far Jes from the
London School of Economics pleasure
talking to
you thank you